---
layout: post
title: Variance
author: Michael Schmitz
category: Scala
---

Variance extends subtyping to classes' generic types.  For example, you might
expect a `Seq[Int]` to be a subtype (`<:`) of `Seq[Any]` because `Int <: Any`.
In Java, all polymorphic classes are invariant.  In other words, `List<Int>`
and `List<Object>` are completely different types--neither is a subtype of the
other.  In Java, you can still write methods that are generic with respect to
the collection, but only by leaving the type unspecified.

```java
public int printEm(List<?> list) {
  for (Object obj : list) {
    System.out.println(obj);
  }
}
```

In Java it is not possible to call a method that takes a `List[Number]` with a
`List[Int]` because `List` is invariant.

```java
public int sumEm(List<Number> list) {
  int sum = 0;
  for (Number num : list) {
    sum += num.intValue();
  }
  return sum;
}

sumEm(Lists.<Integer>newArrayList(1, 2, 3)); // error: list is invariant
```

We can make the previous method covariant in Java, but the client needs to
specify that `List<Number>` be covariant.

```java
public int sumEm(List<? extends Number> list) {
  int sum = 0;
  for (Number num : list) {
    sum += num.intValue();
  }
  return sum;
}

sumEm(Lists.<Integer>newArrayList(1, 2, 3)); // ok
```

Wildcard types in Java (the `?` in the example above), unfortunately, are quite
complicated.  [Joshua Bloch](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joshua_Bloch) once
said:

> “I am completely and totally humbled. Laid low. I realize now that I am
> simply not smart at all. I made the mistake of thinking that I could
> understand generics. I simply cannot. I just can't. This is really
> depressing. It is the first time that I've ever not been able to understand
> something related to computers, in any domain, anywhere, period.”

One major problem with wildcard types is they often push variance annotations
into client code.  Scala takes a much different approach where variance
annotations are indicated in the class definition.  When a class is
parameterized on a type, the type variable can be annotated with `+` to signify
covariance or `-` to signify contravariance.  No annotations means the class is
invariant.

```scala
class Invariant[E]
class Covariant[+E]
class Contravariant[-E]
```

So far, we have only discussed the covariant relationship.  The covariant
relationship applies when the generic type is data that is retrieved (the
generic type is a return type of a method in the class).  It makes sense for a
`Seq[Int] <: Seq[Any]` because if you took out an `Int` you could always use it
as an `Any`.  The contravariant relationship on the other hand applies when the
generic type is data that is acted upon (the generic type is a parameter type
of a method in the class).  For example, consider a class `BooleanFunction`.

```scala
class BooleanFunction[-T] {
  def apply(t: T): Boolean
}
```

If `BooleanFunction` were covariant, a `BooleanFunction[Int]` would be usable
anywhere a `BooleanFunction[Any]` is usable.  But this doesn't make sense
because if you only have an `Any` you can't apply a `BooleanFunction[Int]` to
it--the function could use some information specific to `Int` (most likely it
would).  Here is an example of the problems we would have if `BooleanFunction`
were covariant.

```scala
class BooleanFunction[+] { ... }
val x: Any = "string"
val f = new BooleanFunction[Int] { def apply(x: Int) = (x+1) == 4 }
val fa: BooleanFunction[Any] = f
fa(x) // error: String is not an Int
```

In fact, the Scala compiler will prevent the above example from happening.  If
a method is covariant, the type parameter cannot appear in a contravariant
(argument) position (and if a method is contravariant, the type parameter
cannot appear in the covariant (return) position).

```scala
def example(contravariant-position): covariant-position
```

This presents some problems with non-obvious solutions.  How do we add an item
to a `Seq`?  After all a `Seq` that cannot be extended is not very useful.
Since `Seq` is covariant, we cannot define the following method because `T`
appears in the contravariant position.

```scala
class Seq[+T] {
  ...
  def add(item: T): Seq[T]
  ...
}

// example of problem
val seqInt: Seq[Int] = Seq(1, 2, 3)
val seqAny: Seq[Any] = seq
seqAny.add("string") // error: can't add a string and have a Seq[Int]
```

If `add` were mutable, as in many Java collections, there would be no way to
keep `Seq` invariant.

```scala
val seqInt: Seq[Int] = Seq(1, 2, 3)
val seqAny: Seq[Any] = seqInt

seqAny.add("string") // error: seqInt has a string
```

However we can leverage immutability with a small trick.

```scala
class Seq[+T] {
  ...
  def add[TT >: T](item: TT): Seq[TT]
  ...
}

val seqInt: Seq[Int] = Seq(1, 2, 3)
val seqAny: Seq[Any] = seq
seqAny.add("string") // now we just have a Seq[Any] with Ints and Strings
```

I hope you agree that variance annotations provide a powerful mechanism for
library writers to provide powerful and generic classes.  The beauty of type
annotations is that the client need not understand them in detail.  They just
work.
